Okay. Hi, everyone. Hope we all had a
very productive morning debugging Catbook. I saw a
lot of really good thinking going on. Anyways,
today we're gonna be talking about databases. I'm
Annabel. And I'm Sophie. Yeah. So let's start
with a quick introduction to what databases are.
So currently, the way that we are storing
data in Catbook is that when a client
sends a request and they ping, like, the
API slash story endpoint, for example, like, trying
to write a new story, this is sent
to the server, and all our data is
stored directly on an array called stories in
our server. So this is going to add
a new story directly on our server. So
here's like the code in API.JS right now.
Right? We have like this data object that
has the array of all of our stories
with fields like ID, creator name, and content.
But there's a couple of issues with storing
data in our server just as a variable.
And you might have already encountered some of
them or have already, like, an idea of
what some of the issues might be. So
let's say everything is fine and we're all
good, right, we're posting stories on our cat
book, you guys are, like, busy debugging or
whatever, the clients are sending are pinging the
apistory endpoint. And then our stories object is
being updated accordingly, right? So we're adding the
hi, hello. But let's say, oh no, our
server crashes. So our server is down for
some number of unbearable hours. And let's see
what happens if once our server comes back
up, all of our data is going to
be lost inside the stories array. So everything
that was just sent is now gone. And
obviously, we don't want this. Right? Like, don't
want all of our data to just be
gone if the server crashes. And it's not
just if the server crashes. If we close
our terminal or if, like, your laptop runs
out of battery, then all of your data
will be gone and all the stories that
you just posted are not going to persist
on Catbook. And you can imagine that with
any web application, you want your data to
persist, and you want to be able to
retrieve and display the data that your users
have previously submitted, even if something crashes. The
other thing that happens is, let's say our
server never crashes and it's some, like, super
powerful, like, mega server. But Catbook has a
lot of users. Right? Like, all of you
guys are already using it in class right
now. And this is going to lead to
a lot of RAM issues because that's gonna
be a of memory, and we're storing, like,
hundreds of gigabytes of stories and comments. So
this is also kind of an issue. So
we wanna store our data permanently. And so
one of the other ways, the alternatives that
we have instead of storing the data directly
on the server, is that we can use
a text file. And we can store this
text file on our hard disk instead of
storing everything directly on the server. So this
seems more permanent. Right? We also have, like,
functions that we can use to access and
send data to our text file. So if
we wanna load data, we can use read
data from file, which if you guys have
taken, like, 608 before, you've probably seen it's
like a very basic, like, read data function.
And basically, this is just taking in what
we have in our data dot txt file
and reading that. And then if we want
to save data to data dot txt, can
use the function write data to file. So
here's how we would implement it, for example,
in, like, API yeah, in our API endpoint.
And this is if we wanted to, like,
load the data from the file. So you
might be thinking, yay, we solved the problem.
Now we are storing everything in this text
file on our hard drive, and it's all
good because now it's permanent. But there's still
a couple of issues with this. So what's
wrong with data. Txt? Does anyone want to
take a stab at just like one problem
that they can potentially think of? Yes. Yeah,
exactly. So one of the big issues is
if we're looking up things, it's going to
be extremely slow. So that's like one of
the issues I'll talk about later. But some
of the other issues we have are also
like, kinda like adjacent to what you mentioned,
is if we're saving stories and comments, the
write speed is also gonna be very slow
because we have to call that function every
single time. And you can imagine that's going
be very tedious and slow. The other thing
is, you can imagine, we're still keeping everything
in our RAM, so we can still run
out of storage on our hard drive. So
it's kind of similar to the problems we
had before, like if you run out of
storage in your RAM, this is still an
issue. Also, this is what you're saying. Right?
The query speed is very slow because if
we want to just return one story posted
by a given user ID, right, we have
to linear search through every single one of
the stories, and this can be very, very
slow. Also, your laptop hard drive can still
break. It's not immune. You can drop your
laptop in a pool or something. This is
not fail proof. Also, if two users post
at the exact same time, we don't actually
know what ends up getting stored in data.
Txt because we don't know, like, which user's
request was actually fulfilled to, like, write data
to the file. So that's kind of scary
if we don't know what's being saved in
data. Txt. Now how do we fix all
these issues? Well, we have this really cool
thing called databases. Yeah. So there's like SQL
databases and then also like, MongoDB, which is
what we're gonna be using for our web
application, which Sophie is gonna talk more about
later. But basically, SQL databases are, like, really
good for, like, relational data and, like, very
structured data. But we're gonna use MongoDB because
it's a little more flexible for our purposes.
Basically, a database is just a really organized
collection of data, and it's a way to
store all of the data that you're going
to be handling in your application in, like,
an organized manner. A database management system, DBMS,
is basically a collection of functions that lets
you perform operation on your data from your
database, like retrieving data, adding data, modifying it,
deleting it, etcetera. So our database is basically
like our substitution for data.txt, but much better,
And we'll talk about the reasons why in
a bit. And the database management system is
very similar to the read write data from
file functions that we just talked about earlier,
but also better. And we'll also talk about
why. So there's a lot of different types
of databases, but we're not really gonna get
into it. If you're interested, you can, like,
do more reading on your own. But some
cool examples, I think, are, like, graph based
databases, which show kind of, like, really emphasize
the relations between data, and also time series
databases, like InfluxDB, which shows time stamped data.
So it's really useful if you're trying to
track things over time. And then hierarchical databases,
like IBM, IMS, which shows everything in kind
of like a tree structure. So it'll show
relationships using nodes. That's cool. Anyways, now Sophie
is gonna talk more about how we can
perform different operations with our databases. Yeah. So
we just went over how we're gonna replace
data dot TXT with a database, and we're
gonna replace our read and write functions with
a DBMS. So let's talk a bit more
about the reads and writes through the DBMS.
So yesterday in workshop three, we talked about
how we can make a GET request from
our front end to the slash API slash
comments endpoints to request comments from our server.
And by doing that, our back end server
is gonna send the comments back to the
front end. So what actually happens in the
back end if we now have a database
and Okay. Is this better? Test, test, test.
Okay. So let's talk about what actually happens
in the back end server. So after we
make the API request to the back end
server, our back end server can call a
read function through the DBMS and the DBMS
is gonna go to our database, gather all
the stories from the database, send it back
to the server, and the server can now
send that back to the front end client.
So similarly for writing to the database, if
you remember in workshop three, yesterday, we learned
how we can make a post request to
slash API slash comment in the back end
server and what this does is we write
a new comment to the back end server,
and now the back end server is gonna
store it in the data variable and tell
our front end that it has been successfully
posted. So now let's take a look at
what happens in the back end with our
DBMS database system now. So similarly, our server
is gonna call a write function and through
this write function, this DBMS is gonna take
the new story and add it to our
database. Yeah. So let's take a look at
some pseudo code for read and write functions
through DBMS. So typically, our DBMS is gonna
be a package that we'll want to import
into our back end server, And one operation
we can perform is a read. We could
read all of the stories in the database.
Okay. Another read we can do is with
the query. We could filter the database for
certain stories that we want. So in this
pseudocode, we'll be filtering for all the stories
with ID four. And that'll just be one
story since an ID is a unique identifier
for each object in our database. We can
also do a write as we're familiar with
yesterday. And we could also delete and delete
by a query. So this example might delete
all the stories posted by a certain username,
Joyce. We could also update a story that's
already been written to the database. And this
would make an update to stories with the
author j. But, yeah, this isn't real code,
so don't try writing it in your back
end server. So let's talk about what types
of databases we might use. So the common
example of storing data you might be familiar
with is through, like, Excel and Google Sheets.
And usually, you'll be storing data, like, in
a row column format. So a relational database
in a relational database, each spreadsheet is called
a table, and you'll have rows and columns
for categories of data. So for our example,
you might want a users table showing all
the users using your app and also maybe
a stories table showing all the stories being
posted for your Catbook app. And you'll have
relations between the users and stories. For example,
in the stories, you might want a column
showing the user IDs. So for each story,
which user is posting the story? And you'll
want but for a relational database, you'll need
to write overhead code for dictating the relations
between the users and stories table as shown
here. Some example of relational databases is SQL,
which stands for Structured Query Language. So we
have some problems with this. In the table
shown earlier, the data for one user is
spread out across multiple tables. And as your
web application gets larger and you wanna be
storing more data, this can get really complicated
because you'll have to write overhead code for
any relationship between tables. So this can make
our code hard to understand. And as your
web app gets larger, it'll make add adding
features a lot more difficult. And as I
mentioned earlier, you'll need overhead code for dealing
with the relations between tables. So as a
programmer, we'll have to write all the code
to accommodate the structure of our database, and
that's bad. We want our database to adjust
to the needs as a programmer and have
it be flexible for adding new features and
data. So instead of thinking about our data
in terms of rows and columns, we can
think about a piece of data as an
object as we're already familiar with. So this
is called a document database. Instead of storing
your objects in rows and columns, we can
think of a object with all the fields
as a document. And this is very similar
to JSON objects that you've been working with
in CAPiC already. And documents don't need to
have the same field. So this allows for
a lot of flexibility. So for example, this
is what a document database might look for
look like for the example earlier. But in
this example, the object for Annabel's Annabel's user
object object doesn't have any content. So you
can have very flexible fields. But as we'll
see later, you might want a structure for
your fields, and we'll talk about how we
can do that in the back end. So
back to yesterday's workshop three, we were working
with comments that looked like this. And as
you see, this has the same object layout
that a document database will be using. So
it's a lot more natural and intuitive to
work with as a programmer rather than working
in rows and columns. So the specific document
database we'll be using is called MongoDB. And
this is a document database that stores data
in JSON like documents. So you have documents
which represent each object in a collection of
data. And maybe you'll want very similar looking
documents that live in a collection. So you
might want all your common objects, which are
now called documents, to live in a common
collection. And similarly, you might want a stories
collection containing all of your stories documents, which
are, like, JSON objects. And you want all
of your collections to live in a database,
which will correspond to all the data you
wanna hold for your web application. So we
might have a CAPDUC database. So now instead
of having a text file that lives on
our hard drive, We can use MongoDB and
the corresponding database management system. So this optimizes
our write speed because a lot of engineers
at MongoDB have thought about this and thought
about ways to optimize it. We're also optimizing
our memory usage because we're no longer storing
all of our data in a variable in
our server. Query speed and concurrency issues are
also solved thanks to engineers at MongoDB. Yeah.
Just as a reminder, earlier, we were storing
all of this data as a variable in
our server, so that takes up a lot
of RAM. But there's still one more issue.
Our hard drive could still break. We wanna
make sure that our web app is foolproof
so that any fault we might encounter is
tolerated and doesn't interfere with the with how
our web app operates and how our users
use our web app. So how do you
make storage of our database fault tolerant? Does
anyone have an idea? Yeah. Yes. The naive
solution is redundancy, and that's exactly what MongoDB
does. It duplicates data across different hard drives
so that in case anyone fails, we can
just access a different hard drive that contains
all of our data. So MongoDB Atlas does
this for us. Instead of storing our database
on our computer's hard drive, we can use
MongoDB Atlas and store it somewhere over the
cloud, and this makes our life easier. We
no longer have to deal with running the
database on our laptop and dealing with problems
in case it breaks. The database is managed
for you by MongoDB Atlas, and you can
also share your data with your teammates as
you're working on your web lab project. And
this is a lot more reliable than your
laptop's hard drive because it replicates your data.
So now your back end server is gonna
store your data over the cloud. And what
this looks like is it'll be accessing your
primary MongoDB instance on one hard drive, and
you have replicate sets of this instance. So
in case the primary MongoDB dies, the hard
disk breaks, you can access a replica set.
So let's take a look at the MongoDB
user interface. So if you have here's a
Catbook database and in it, I have comments,
stories, and users collections. Right now, I have
the stories collections clicked. And inside the stories
collection, I have different documents. These look like
JSON objects, and they have different fields. And
if you're working on making some data, like
Mickey Mouse data for your web application later
on for your web lab project, you can
just edit fields in directly from the MongoDB
interface and add new documents. So let's put
everything together. When we make a GET request,
the front end code is gonna send that
request to the back end. And it's gonna
make it to the API stories endpoint if
we're trying to read stories data. And now
the backend, instead of sending data from the
stories file, it's gonna make it's gonna call
the DBMS, which is gonna go to the
database, find all the stories. The database is
gonna send this back to the back end,
which can send it back to the front
end as we went over yesterday. Similarly, we
can now make POST requests to create, update,
or delete data. So the front end, maybe
your user is making an edit to their
story or adding a new story. The front
end will make a POST request to the
slash apistories endpoint. The back end receives this
request. It's gonna call maybe some write function
or delete functions via the DBMS. And now
it can perform the operation in the database.
So in summary, rather than storing data on
our server or in a text file, we'll
be using a database to store our data.
And the specific database we'll be using is
a document database called MongoDB. And specifically, instead
of running MongoDB on our hard disk to
make our database more fault tolerant, we'll run
it over the cloud using Atlas because Atlas
automatically has redundancy for us in case the
primary MongoDB hard disk breaks. So after lunch,
we'll talk about how we can oh, okay.
So now we'll talk a bit about MongoDB
specifics. Feel free to leave some feedback for
the intro databases lecture. Yay. Okay. Yeah. Okay.
Now we'll talk about MongoDB specifically. What is
MongoDB? So as we just mentioned, it's a
document database that allows our JSON objects to
be stored directly in the database like we're
familiar with. So here's an example of a
JSON object. There's three fields, a name field
for my name, Sophie, my age, which is
a number, and my hobbies, which is an
array of strings. So these are examples of
objects that might be stored in the database.
So why are we using MongoDB? So it's
efficient when we need to write a lot
to the database, a humongous amount. So actually,
Mongo is an abbreviation for humongous, and it's
also useful for the when our the structure
of our data is very prone to changes
because just as we talked about, the fields
allow us a lot of flexibility because we
can add new fields or change the amount
of fields in a document. And it's relatively
easy to use as a programmer because it's
very intuitive in the object oriented nature. So
let's talk a bit more about the structure
of MongoDB. So in each object, you might
have fields to describe the object. So maybe
we'll have a field describing the color, length,
or how poofy or how angry our object
is. I've been calling it a corgi, but
apparently this is a Shiva. Yeah. Okay. And
we'll have documents which correspond to each object.
So inside the document, we have fields and
this document might correspond to a corgi. And
we might have a collection of corgis which
might look like oh. Oh, by the way,
I'm trying to make a parallel to a
warehouse. Warehouse. So paralleling to a warehouse, a
collection might be a crate of corgis, and
a database might be a bunch of crates,
which are collections. So your database might hold
a bunch of different types of collections, collections
which each have different objects in them. And
a MongoDB instance might be like a warehouse
of storage units. So to reiterate in words,
a MongoDB instance is a group of databases
that live on one server. And remember that
we have duplicate replica sets of MongoDB instances.
A database lives inside your instance, and it
usually corresponds to one web application and holds
all the data you want to store for
that web application. And a database might have
a bunch of different collections, and each collection
is a group of very similar pieces of
data. So maybe we'll want a collection for
our stories, a collection for our users, a
collection for our comments, and etcetera. Inside each
collection, we're gonna hold many different documents which
we want to have similar structures. So maybe
in our stories collection, we want all our
documents to share similar fields such as name,
content, ID, and yeah. So this here is
a diagram of the structure of our storage
facility. And also, this is a sneak peek
of the prizes we'll have at our hackathon
or giveaway prizes. So make sure to come.
And this corresponds to these MongoDB objects. Yeah.
Okay. So if you have any questions, feel
free to drop them in weblab. Isquestions. So
remember, we talked about why we're using MongoDB
and it's because it allows our databases to
be very flexible compared to a SQL database.
So this means that different documents in the
collection can have different fields as we just
went over. So here's an example. So say
we have a CORGI collections with these three
documents, a document for three CORGIs named Sophie,
Annabel, and Abby. All three of these documents
have the name field, but you notice that
they shared the other fields that they are,
other fields that they have, they don't share.
But if we're working on a web application,
we might want all of our documents to
share the same fields in a collection. So
what if we wanna enforce the same structure
for all documents in a collection so that
all of these QWERTY documents have all same
five fields with the same type for their
value, we can use Mongoose. Mongoose is an
object data modeling JavaScript library that we'll use
in our back end server that will allow
us to enforce a structure for the documents
in our collection. So fun fact, a Mongoose
is also a mammal And the plural is
mongooses, not mongeese. Okay. So what is mongoose?
Mongoose is a JavaScript library that we'll use
in our back end server, and it allows
us to interact with MongoDB. It allows us
to enforce a structure for our collections from
the very beginning. So once we start making
post requests and get requests to our database,
they'll already have the structure. So what does
Mongoose do? It connects to the MongoDB cluster,
which we'll cover code for in the workshop.
It enforces schemas and models, which dictate the
structure of the documents in the collection. It
allows us to create documents by having functions
that kinda parallel the DBMS, and that allows
us to interact with the database using with
create functions, read, updates, deletes, and more. And
I think we'll end here. Yeah? Okay.